---
author: isotopp
date: "2017-08-07T19:34:37Z"
feature-img: rijksmuseum.jpg
published: true
status: publish
tags:
- work
- lang_en
title: The company as a social engine
---
So why is everything so complicated? At work, I mean.

Think of a small company. A single person, a founder, is building her
business. She knows her way around, it's all in her head: The plan, the
things that are important and why, and how they are to be executed. Also,
tradeoffs to be corrected later, potential opportunities for later and a lot
of other meta: Stuff that does not get executed right now, but that informs
decisions, priorities and preferences.

Things work with some precision, though, like a well programmed wetware CPU.

The moment that stuff becomes too large for a single person to handle, more
people are involved and things need to be verbalized, written down, given
form. At that point, things change quite a bit:

The task at hand is to program a second CPU, wetware, with a part of the
program that the first person has been executing. That's necessary so she
can delegate, and the entire operation can scale.

Unfortunately, as with all remote procedure call mechanisms, complicated
unfolded in-memory structures have to serialized before the can be
marshalled off to a second node and are being re-instantiated over there. In
this particular case, the language to describe the code to be executed is
informally specified, too, and the remote CPU also does not match the specs
of the first CPU, that is, English is really bad for programming computers
or people, and also each person is different.

To make matters worse there is no proper debugger, the same broken language
has to be used to printf-debug the remote ("Do you understand what I mean?"
"Do you understand why it is important that we do things this way?") and
there may be other, older code in the remote that interferes with the
execution of our code. People have history and they have ideas.

If you think of a company as a large distributed engine to execute code that
has been extracted painfully and incompletely from the wetware engine of a
founder, and which has been mangled due to improper serialization in a
language with limited expressiveness, you have a good idea of the corporate
environment.

You can't see what happens in the individual nodes, you can only observe the
communication between them, and the parts of the program that made it into
writing, or at least the Wiki. You can think of processes as written down
instructions for the engine:

Any process ("buy more paperclips") describes who needs to talk to whom,
about what and why, in order to make things happen ("You need to create a
purchase order, which needs to be signed by _X_ for values over _n_ EUR in
order to limit our liability. The signed order is then sent to _Z_, who will
actually spend money to buy stuff. You get stuff, and sign here to document
that.")
Writing instructions and process down is important, and a great improvement
actually, because writing these instructions down forces all involves
parties (including the founders) to come clear about all the details and the
meta about the details - things that might have been existing only vaguely
in some mind, previously, now have to get a precise shape.

Also, they become tangible, and by the way of tangibility, they are open to
challenge, discussion and modification - which is why some founders are
actually resisting to give tangible form to certain things. Giving tangible
shape to instructions and the meta - why instructions, why these
instructions, why these instructions in this order with these emphasis - is
a complicated, painful and slow process, precisely because the originator of
an idea - the founder or some other person with an idea - has to give up the
idea and let it out into the world, where it will be subjected to change by
others.

Loss of control is always violent and painful, and as with any new thing
given a permanent form, there is always negotiation about the details.
Giving birth to anything: It's exhausting. It's not a one step process. A
founder has an idea and a plan, but in many parts it is still early,
untested and vague.

They put things into words, and the words are being tried out - can we work
by these instructions, or are there things unclear? Can the instructions
work, or does the plan need change? Can it be improved? Can it be applied to
other, similar things? Iterations happen. Do we go deep or wide - do we
specialize and improve this application of a plan, or do we try to apply the
plan as is to as many things as possible first?

Again, negotiation, and consequently, exhaustion.

So why is everything so complicated? Because companies are broken. All of
them.

Their engine, their program, their processes, are magnifications of the mind
of the founder or other influential people at the top. The entire corporate
mechanism is built to do exactly this.

And with this mechanism not only the original idea is being magnified and
copied to many minds, but other aspects of the original mind are, too. And
because the source was a person, with flaws, they too, are being magnified
and multiplied.

Do you like it around here? Well, that's because like all corporate
environments, this one is broken, too. It just so happens that the breakage
around here is more compatible with your own flaws than elsewhere.

Yes, your work environment sucks. They all do.

Find the one that sucks in a way that suits your needs.
